One step migration (#707)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.9.0/docs/canton/usermanual/upgrading.rst

Author: Note: Actual changes, please review.

This guide also assumes that the upgrade is a minor or a patch release. Major release upgrades might
differ and will be covered separately if necessary.

.. warning::
  Upgrading to a new release requires care and preparation.
    * Please read the entire guide before proceeding.
    * Please back up your data before any upgrade.
    * Please test your upgrade thoroughly before attempting to upgrade your production system.

.. _upgrade_canton_binary:

Upgrade Canton Binary
---------------------

A Canton node consists of one or more processes, where each process is defined by

- A Java Virtual Machine application running a versioned JAR of Canton.
- A set of configuration files describing the node that is being run.
- An optional bootstrap script passed via ``--boostrap``, which runs on startup.
- A database (with a specific schema), holding the data of the node.

Therefore, to upgrade the node, you need to

> #. replace the Canton binary (which contains the Canton JAR)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Replace the Canton binary (which contains the Canton JAR).
```

> #. test that the configuration files can still be parsed by the new process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Test that the configuration files can still be parsed by the new process.
```

> #. test that the bootstrap script you are using is still working

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Test that the bootstrap script you are using is still working.
```

> #. upgrade the database schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Upgrade the database schema.
```

~~~~~~~~~~~

First, please download the new Canton binary that you want to upgrade to and store it on the test

> system where you want to test the upgrade process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
system where you plan to test the upgrade process.
```

Version Specific Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _upgrade_to_2.9:

Upgrade to Release 2.9
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TODO

> Other

Reviewer 2: Find more precise title ? It appears as "Other" in the ToC which is a bit weird

"""""
Version 2.9 adds a new repair command :ref:`participant.repair.purge_deactivated_domain <repair.purge_deactivated_domain>`
to delete data of a defunct domain.

We recommend to use this command to remove remaining but useless data of previous
sync domains that have been migrated using the :ref:`participant.repair.migrate_domain <repair.migrate_domain>`
command.

Note that the ``migrate_domain`` command in 2.9 now automatically removes such data,

> but only for the sync domain on which it has been invoked on.

Reviewer 2: The details of the changes are in the release notes. In that page, we only list changes that require changes from the end users (adapt config, change a console command, ...) Since the purge_deactivated_domain is not needed for the migration (invoked transparently), I'd remove this new section for now.

Author: > Since the purge_deactivated_domain is not needed for the migration (invoked transparently), I'd remove this new section for now.

I added this section specifically to point out that customers should run the command for domains which they have migrated before as I think their data still lingers in the data store. When doing a hard domain migration only the old (source) domain gets cleaned up, but other inactive (deactivated) domains remain as is.

We added this command specifically for that purpose.

Note: to use the same database with different schemas for the old and the new sync domain, set the `currentSchema` either in the JDBC URL or as a parameter in `storage.config.properties`.

.. _hard_sync_domain_upgrade:

Hard Synchronization Domain Connection Upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. warning::

>   Ensure that you have appropriate backups in place and that you have tested this procedure before applying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Ensure that you have appropriate backups in place and have tested this procedure before applying
```

  it to your production system.

A hard sync domain connection upgrade can be performed using the :ref:`respective migration command <repair.migrate_domain>`.

> You will have to enable this command using a special config switch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must enable this command using a special config switch:
```

This applies to all sync domain services, be it sequencer, mediator, or topology manager.

Wit that, the protocol upgrade process boils down to:

#. **Deploy a new sync domain with the new protocol version**

>    Deploy a new sync domain next to the old sync domain and ensure that the new sync

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Deploy a new sync domain and ensure that the new sync
```
not sure what "next to" means in context of domains.

   domain is using the desired protocol version.

   Also make sure to use different databases (or at least different schemas in the same database)

>    for the sync domain services (mediator, sequencer node, and topology manager), channel names,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   for the sync domain services (domain node, mediator, sequencer node, and topology manager), channel names,
```

   smart contract addresses, etc.

   The new sync domain must be completely separate, but you can reuse
   your DLT backend as long as you use different sequencer contract addresses or Fabric channels.

#. **Carry out a hard sync domain migration**

   Instruct the participants individually using the :ref:`hard sync domain migration<hard_sync_domain_upgrade>`
   to use the new sync domain.

.. note::

    Currently, the sync domain ID cannot be preserved during upgrades.
    The new sync domain must have a different sync domain ID because the participant
    associates a sync domain connection with a sync domain ID, and that association

>     must be unique.

Reviewer 2: As usual, I would make how-to guides as short as possible. Consider removing the second sentence which answers to a WHY question.

.. note::

>     To use the same database with different schemas for the old and the new sync domain,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To use the same database with different schemas for the old and the new sync domains,
```

    set the ``currentSchema`` either in the JDBC URL or as a parameter in ``storage.config.properties``.

.. _hard_sync_domain_upgrade:

Hard Synchronization Domain Migration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. warning::

    Ensure that you have appropriate backups in place and have tested this procedure before applying
    it to your production system.

A hard sync domain migration is performed using the :ref:`respective migration command <repair.migrate_domain>`.

.. _enable-repair-commands:

You must enable this command using a special config switch:

.. code:: text

    canton.features.enable-repair-commands=yes

> Assuming that we have several participants, all connected to a sync domain named ``olddomain``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming that you have several participants all connected to a sync domain named ``olddomain``,
```

> then ensure that there are no pending transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensure that there are no pending transactions.
```

    .. assert:: { participant.domains.connect_local(olddomain); true }
    .. success:: participant.resources.set_resource_limits(ResourceLimits(Some(0), Some(0)))

> This rejects all commands and finishes processing the pending commands. Once you are sure that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This rejects any new command and finishes processing the pending commands. Once you are sure that
```

your participant node is idle, disconnect the participant node from the old sync domain:

.. snippet:: migrating_protocol
    .. success:: participant.domains.disconnect("olddomain")

Test that the participant is disconnected from the sync domain by checking the list of active connections:

.. snippet:: migrating_protocol
    .. success:: participant.domains.list_connected()
    .. assert:: participant.domains.list_connected().isEmpty

> This is a good time to perform a backup of the database before proceeding.

Reviewer 2: Why this change ?

.. code:: sql

    CREATE DATABASE newdb WITH TEMPLATE originaldb OWNER dbuser;

> .. warning::

Reviewer 2: The fact that the warning shows before the invocation of the command but refers to it makes the reading a bit difficult. I'd suggest to rephrase slightly:
```
.. warning::

    Note that the hard domain migration modifies the participant's data storage.
    Without a database backup for your participant a potential recovery becomes significantly
    more difficult.
```
or even
```
.. warning::

    Note that the following steps modify participant's data storage.
    Without a database backup for your participant a potential recovery becomes significantly
    more difficult.
```

    Note that the hard domain migration :ref:`command<repair.migrate_domain>` ``repair.migrate_domain``
    modifies the participant's data storage.

>     Without a database backup for your participant a potential recovery becomes significantly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Without a database backup for your participant, a potential recovery becomes significantly
```

    .. success:: participant.repair.migrate_domain("olddomain", config)

> This command will register the new sync domain and re-associate the contracts tied to ``olddomain`` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command registers the new sync domain and re-associate the contracts tied to ``olddomain`` to
```

.. snippet:: migrating_protocol
    .. success:: participant.repair.migrate_domain("olddomain", config)

This command registers the new sync domain and re-associate the contracts tied to ``olddomain`` to

> the new sync domain. In addition some data specific to the old domain are automatically deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the new sync domain. In addition some data specific to the old domain is automatically deleted.
```

> the new sync domain. In addition some data specific to the old domain are automatically deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the new sync domain. In addition, some data specific to the old domain is automatically deleted.
```

.. warning::

>     The command ``repair.migrate_domain`` features a ``force`` flag. If you intentionally set it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The command ``repair.migrate_domain`` has a ``force`` flag. If it is explicitly set to
```

>     ``true`` then you force a sync domain migration ignoring any pending transactions. Forcing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``true``, it forces a sync domain migration, ignoring any pending transactions. Forcing a
```

>     migration may result in a ledger fork. Use this flag as a last resort only.

Reviewer 2: What is the reason/purpose to advertise this here ?

Author: Over-documentation -> removed.

one by one, such that eventually, all contracts are associated with the new sync domain, allowing
the old sync domain to be decommissioned and turned off.

The soft upgrade path provides a smooth user experience that does not require a hard migration of the sync domain connection to be
coordinated across all participants. Instead, participants upgrade individually, whenever they
are ready, allowing them to reverse the process if needed.

.. _one_step_migration:

One Step Migration
------------------
A *one step migration* intends to :ref:`upgrade the binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` and
:ref:`change the protocol version <change_pv>` in one step. It is a combination of the
steps documented in :ref:`Hard Synchronization Domain Connection Upgrade <hard_sync_domain_upgrade>`
and :ref:`Upgrade Canton Binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` from a operational point of

> view. Thus, we assume strong familiarity with aforementioned sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
view. Thus, strong understanding of the aforementioned sections is required.
```
Hi, according to our style guide, we're steering away from the "we" or "one" voice and using the "you" voice instead, when necessary. Thank you.

one by one, such that eventually, all contracts are associated with the new sync domain, allowing
the old sync domain to be decommissioned and turned off.

The soft upgrade path provides a smooth user experience that does not require a hard migration of the sync domain connection to be
coordinated across all participants. Instead, participants upgrade individually, whenever they
are ready, allowing them to reverse the process if needed.

.. _one_step_migration:

> One Step Migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One-Step Migration
```

------------------

> A *one step migration* intends to :ref:`upgrade the binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *one-step migration* intends to :ref:`upgrade the binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` and
```

:ref:`change the protocol version <change_pv>` in one step. It is a combination of the
steps documented in :ref:`Hard Synchronization Domain Connection Upgrade <hard_sync_domain_upgrade>`
and :ref:`Upgrade Canton Binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` from a operational point of
view. Thus, strong understanding of the aforementioned sections is required.

.. note::

>     There is no need for a one step migration when upgrading from one release version to another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There is no need for a one-step migration when upgrading from one release version to another,
```

>     while both release versions support the protocol version that your current sync domain is using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    as long as both release versions support the protocol version that your current sync domain uses.
```

    Follow the steps for :ref:`upgrading the Canton binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` instead.

> The one step migration covers an upgrade from Canton version 2.3 and following minor versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The one-step migration covers an upgrade from Canton version 2.3 and following minor versions
```

up to this minor release version. Additionally, it upgrades the protocol version supported by
these prior releases to the latest protocol version supported by this minor release version.

Every upgrade requires specific and thorough testing before applying it to a particular production

> environment. Even though the one step migration process has been tested through automatic and manual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
environment. Even though the one-step migration process has been tested through automatic and manual
```

> tests and its steps are known to work, additional measures and configuration may be required to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tests, and its steps are known to work, additional measures and configuration may be required to
```

Furthermore, upon reconnecting, the participant needs to recompute the new set of commitments. This can take
a while for large numbers of contracts.

.. _one_step_migration:

One-Step Migration
------------------
A *one-step migration* intends to :ref:`upgrade the binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` and
:ref:`change the protocol version <change_pv>` in one step. It is a combination of the
steps documented in :ref:`upgrade_canton_binary` and the :ref:`hard_sync_domain_upgrade`.

> Thus, strong understanding of these sections is required.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove that section: for me the user should be able to follow the steps **carefully** without necessarily understanding everything which is behind.

The one-step migration covers an upgrade from Canton version 2.3 and following minor versions
up to this minor release version. Additionally, it upgrades the protocol version supported by
these prior releases to a protocol version supported by this minor release version.

.. note::

    There is no need for a one-step migration when upgrading from one release version to another,
    as long as both release versions support the protocol version that your current sync domain uses.

>     Follow the steps for :ref:`upgrading the Canton binary <upgrade_canton_binary>` instead.

Reviewer 2: Add reference to the table which is in https://docs.daml.com/canton/usermanual/versioning.html#canton-protocol-version ?

.. warning::

    Every upgrade requires specific and thorough testing before applying it to a particular production
    environment. Even though the one-step migration process has been tested through automatic and manual
    tests, and its steps are known to work, additional measures and configuration may be required to

>     address the peculiarities of your environment.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

One-Step Migration Recipe for 2.9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
General recipe to migrate from a sync domain running on a :ref:`2.3 <upgrade_to_2.3>`,
:ref:`2.4 <upgrade_to_2.4>`, :ref:`2.5 <upgrade_to_2.5>`, :ref:`2.6 <upgrade_to_2.6>`,
:ref:`2.7 <upgrade_to_2.7>` or :ref:`2.8 <upgrade_to_2.8>` release and protocol
version 3 or 4 to a new sync domain running on the 2.9 release and protocol version 5:

.. note::

>     We recommend using protocol version 5 even though 2.9 supports other protocol versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Although version 2.9 supports other protocol versions, it is recommended to use protocol version 5.
```

#. Start a new sync domain running protocol version 5

> #. :ref:`Halt activity on the current sync domain <halt-activity-current-domain>`

Reviewer 2: Do we want to use old/new terminology ? (so current->old)

#. Wait for pending transactions to complete or time out
#. Backup the current sync domain including participants
#. Participants: Upgrade the binary to 2.9
#. Participants: :ref:`Enable repair commands <enable-repair-commands>`

> #. All nodes: :ref:`Test the configuration <test-your-config>` considering these :ref:`details <test-your-config-details>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. All nodes: :ref:`Test the configuration <test-your-config>` considering this :ref:`additional change <test-your-config-details>` if your old domain runs protocol version 3.
```

#. All nodes: :ref:`Apply the DB migrations <migrating_the_database>`
#. Participants: Connect to the new sync domain, then disconnect from all domains
#. Participants: Invoke :ref:`command<repair.migrate_domain>` ``repair.migrate_domain``
#. Participants: Reconnect to the new sync domain

> #. Resume activity on the new sync domain

Reviewer 2: Activity on the new domain is never halted, so you can drop this point.
What can be added is the the old domain can be decomissioned.

.. _halt-activity-current-domain:

Halt activity on the current sync domain
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
For a sync domain running on protocol version 3, set the resource limits to 0 on each participant.

.. code-block:: text

    participant.resources.set_resource_limits(ResourceLimits(Some(0), Some(0)))

> Otherwise, set the :ref:`dynamic domain parameter <dynamic_domain_parameters>` ``maxRatePerParticipant`` to 0.

Reviewer 2: I would put this one first: "For a sync domain running protocol version 4 and above, ..."

.. _test-your-config-details:

> Test the configuration - Additional details

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test the configuration - Additional change if you were running protocol version 3
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When migrating from protocol version 3 which uses an unauthenticated contract id scheme, you may need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from protocol version 3, which uses an unauthenticated contract id scheme, you may need to
```
